GitHub Actions: documentation (#2750)
objectcomputing/OpenDDS: docs/internal/github_actions.rst

##############################
Github Actions Summary and FAQ
##############################

Github Actions is the continuous integration technique currently being
used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It runs our suite of
tests accross a wide variation of operation systems and configurations.

When run on a pull request, Github Actions will simulate a merge between
the pull request branch, and master.

When not on a pull request, Github Actions can made to run by giving your
branch the prefix "gh_wf_". These local runs of Github Actions be viewed in
the "actions" tab in your fork. Local runs of the workflows do not
simulate a merge and run only the code on the branch. This prefix is
useful when you are early in development and are not ready to open

> a PR for your branch.

Author: Made some changes to the wording.  It is a little better but still reads poorly.

an artifact to be used in the third step. The third step is the *test_*
job, which runs the appropriate tests for the associated OpenDDS
configuration.

Certain builds do not follow this 3 step model. Safety builds are done
in one step due to the cross-compile nature causing problems. Static and Release
builds have a large footprint and therefore cannot fit the entire test suite onto
a Github Actions runner.  As a result, they instead build tests during the test
step, and run different groups of tests in individual jobs. These individual test
groups are prefixed by *compiler_* which runs the tests/DCPS/Compiler tests, *unit_*
which runs the unit tests located in tests/DCPS/UnitTest and tests/unit-tests, and
*messenger_* which runs the tests in tests/DCPS/Messenger and tests/DCPS/C++11/Messenger.

In addition to these builds, there are some builds which will not run the test suite, in
an effort to shorten the runtime of the continuous integration.  An exception to this is
that all builds which are not safety, and have ownership profile enabled, will run the
tests/cmake tests. Test runs which only contain CMake tests are prefixed by *cmake_*.

Test Results
============

> The tests are run using autobuild which will generate an artifact containing the test

Reviewer: Link to autobuild?

Also, for clarity, something like: Autobuild creates several files which are turned into another GitHub artifact... And this artifact is then analyzed by the "Check Test Results" workflow which will modify the PR's "Checks" results to include detailed summaries of these test runs.

##############################
GitHub Actions Summary and FAQ
##############################

********
Overview
********

GitHub Actions is the continuous integration solution currently being
used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It builds OpenDDS and runs the
test suite across a wide variety of operation systems and build configurations.

*************************************
Legend for GitHub Actions Build Names
*************************************

> Operating System

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operating System (see `GitHub Virtual Environments<https://github.com/actions/virtual-environments>`_)
```

================

* u18/u20 - Ubuntu 18.04/Ubuntu 20.04

> * w16/w19 - Windows 2016/Windows 2019

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* w16/w19 - Windows Server 2016 (Visual Studio 2017)/Windows Server 2019 (Visual Studio 2019)
```

on the fork in which the branch resides. These fork runs of GitHub Actions can be
viewed in the "Actions" tab. Runs of the workflow on forks will not simulate a
merge between the branch and master.

Job Types
=========

There are a number of job types that are contained in the file build_and_test.yml.
Where possible, a configuration will contain 3 jobs. The first job that
is run is *ACE_TAO_*. This will create an artifact which is used later
by the OpenDDS build. The second job is *build_*, which uses the previous
*ACE_TAO_* job to configure and build OpenDDS. This job will then export
an artifact to be used in the third step. The third step is the *test_*
job, which runs the appropriate tests for the associated OpenDDS
configuration.

Certain builds do not follow this 3 step model. Safety Profile builds are done
in one step due to cross-compile issues. Static and Release builds have a large
footprint and therefore cannot fit the entire test suite onto a Github Actions runner.
As a result, they only build and run a subset of the tests in their final jobs, but then have
multiple final jobs to increase test coverage. These jobs are prefixed by: *compiler_* which

> runs the ``tests/DCPS/Compiler tests``, *unit_* which runs the unit tests located

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
runs the ``tests/DCPS/Compiler`` tests, *unit_* which runs the unit tests located
```

##############################
GitHub Actions Summary and FAQ
##############################

> GitHub Actions is the continuous integration solution currently being
> used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It runs the OpenDDS suite of
> tests accross a wide variation of operation systems and build configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GitHub Actions is the continuous integration solution currently being
used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It builds OpenDDS and runs the test suite across a wide variety of operation systems and build configurations.
```

GitHub Actions is the continuous integration solution currently being
used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It builds OpenDDS and runs the
test suite across a wide variety of operation systems and build configurations.

*************************************
Legend for GitHub Actions Build Names
*************************************

Operating System
================

* u18/u20 - Ubuntu 18.04/Ubuntu 20.04
* w16/w19 - Windows 2016/Windows 2019
* m10 - MacOS 10.15

Build Configuration
===================

* x86 - Windows 32 bit. If not specified, x64 is implied.
* re - Release build.  If not specified, Debug is implied.
* clang5/clang10/gcc6/gcc8/gcc10 - compiler used to build

> OpenDDS. If not specified, the default system compiler is used.

Reviewer 4: Same problem

```suggestion
   OpenDDS. If not specified, the default system compiler is used.
```

Build Type
==========

* stat - Static build
* bsafe/esafe - Base Safety/Extended Safety build
* sec - Security build
* asan - Address Sanitizer build

Build Options
=============

* o1 - enables ``--optimize``
* d0 - enables ``--no-debug``
* i0 - enables ``--no-inline``

> * p1 - enables ipv6

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* p1 - enables ``--ipv6``
```

> OpenDDS. If not specified, default system compiler is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenDDS. If not specified, the default system compiler is used.
```

* w1 - enables wide characters
* v1 - enables versioned namespace
* cpp03 - ``--std=c++03``
* j/j8/j12 - Default System Java/Java8/Java12
* ace7 - uses ace7tao3 rather than ace6tao2
* xer0 - disables xerces
* qt - enables ``--qt``
* ws - enables ``--wireshark``
* js0 - enables ``--no-rapidjson``

Feature Mask
============

This is a mask in an attempt to keep names shorter.

* FM-08

  * ``--no-built-in-topics``
  * ``--no-content-subscription``
  * ``--no-ownership-profile``
  * ``--no-object-model-profile``
  * ``--no-persistence-profile``

* FM-1f

  * ``--no-built-in-topics``

* FM-2c

  * ``--no-content-subscription``
  * ``--no-object-model-profile``
  * ``--no-persistence-profile``

* FM-2f

  * ``--no-content-subscription``

* FM-37

  * ``--no-content-filtered-topics``

***************************
build_and_test.yml Workflow
***************************

Our main workflow which dictates our GitHub Actions run is
``.github/workflows/build_and_test.yml``. It defines jobs, which are the tasks that

> are run by the CI.

Reviewer 4: Maybe add a link somewhere to the [workflow syntax](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions)?

Our main workflow which dictates our GitHub Actions run is

> build_and_test.yml. It defines jobs, which are the tasks that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`.github/workflows/build_and_test.yml`. It defines jobs, which are the tasks that
```

There are a couple ways in which a run of build and test workflow can be `started <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/events-that-trigger-workflows>`_.

Any pull request targeting master will automatically run the
OpenDDS workflows. This form of workflow run with simulate a merge
between the branch and master.

Push events on branches prefixed ``gh_wf_`` will trigger workflow runs
on the fork in which the branch resides. These fork runs of GitHub Actions can be
viewed in the "Actions" tab. Runs of the workflow on forks will not simulate a
merge between the branch and master.

Caching
========

The OpenDDS workflows create .tar.xz archives of certain build artifacts
which can then up uploaded and shared between jobs (and the user)
as part of GitHub Actions' "artifact" API. A cache key comparison made using
the relevant git commit SHA in order to determine if there is any need to rebuild
the artifact, or if the existing cached artifact can be used instead.

To make CI runs quicker, a seperate build is made for ACE_TAO, rather
than building it at the same time as OpenDDS. This allows us to cache
ACE_TAO relatively often due to the stability of the ace6tao2 branch.

> 

Author: I'm just going to remove this paragraph. I think it is described well enough in the first paragraph of "Caching".

in their final jobs, but then have multiple final jobs to increase test coverage. These
jobs are prefixed by: *compiler_* which runs the ``tests/DCPS/Compiler tests``, *unit_*
which runs the unit tests located in ``tests/DCPS/UnitTest`` and ``tests/unit-tests``, and
*messenger_* which runs the tests in ``tests/DCPS/Messenger`` and ``tests/DCPS/C++11/Messenger``.

In addition to these builds, there are some builds which will not run the test suite in
an effort to shorten the runtime of the continuous integration.  An exception to this is
that all builds which are not safety, and have ownership profile enabled, will run the
``tests/cmake`` tests. Test runs which only contain CMake tests are prefixed by ``cmake_``.

Test Results
============

The tests are run using `autobuild <https://github.com/DOCGroup/autobuild>`_ which creates a number of output files
that are turned into a GitHub artifact. This artifact is processed by the
"Check Test Results" workflow which modifies the files with detailed summaries of the test runs.
After all of the Check Test Results jobs are complete, the test results will be posted in either

> the build_and_test or lint workflows. It is random which one of the workflows the results will appear

Author: @simpsont-oci Do you have a quick summary of why it is random?

> the build_and_test or lint workflows. It is random which one of the workflows the results will appear

Reviewer: This is a known problem with the GitHub API for creating a new Test Check. There's nothing we can do about this until GitHub fixes the problem. See [here](https://github.com/dorny/test-reporter/issues/67) or [here](https://github.com/mikepenz/action-junit-report/issues/40).

in, so be sure to check both.

Artifacts
=========

Artifacts from the continuous integration run can be downloaded by clicking details
on one of the Build & Test runs. There is a dropdown on the bar next to "Re-run jobs"

> called "Artifacts" which lists each artifact that can be downloaded.

Reviewer 5: I don't see a dropdown "Artifacts".

Author: If you click the "checks" tab in a PR and then Select "Build & Test", or if you select one of the "Build & Test"  results from the bottom of the "details" page in a PR, it will appear near the number of lines changed in PR.  It won't show up by default when you click checks because it defaults to opening lint, which we don't create any artifacts in.

Reviewer 5: Clayton, could you check if the "Artifacts" dropdown wont show until the jobs are completed? If that's true, we may add "When the jobs are completed, a dropdown "Artifacts" will appear ...".

Alternatively, clicking the "Summary" button at the top of the list of jobs will
list all the available artifacts at the bottom of the page.

Using Artifacts to Replicate Builds
-----------------------------------

You can download the ``ACE_TAO_`` and ``build_`` artifacts then use them for a local build,
so long as your operating system is the same as the one on the runner.

1. ``git clone`` the ACE_TAO branch which is targeted by the build. This is usually going to be

> ``ace6tao2``.
> 2. ``git clone --recursive`` the OpenDDS branch on which the CI was run.
> 3. Merge OpenDDS master into your cloned branch.
> 4. run ``tar xvfJ`` from inside the cloned ACE_TAO, targeting the *ACE_TAO_* .tar.xz file.
> 5. run ``tar xvfJ`` from inside the cloned OpenDDS, targeting the *build_* .tar.xz file.
> 6. Adjust the setenv.sh located inside OpenDDS to match the new locations for your ACE_TAO,
> and OpenDDS. The word "runner" should not appear within the setenv.sh once you are finished.

Reviewer 4: [Not rendering as a list](https://opendds--2750.org.readthedocs.build/en/2750/internal/github_actions.html#using-artifacts-to-replicate-builds)

```suggestion
   ``ace6tao2``.
2. ``git clone --recursive`` the OpenDDS branch on which the CI was run.
3. Merge OpenDDS master into your cloned branch.
4. run ``tar xvfJ`` from inside the cloned ACE_TAO, targeting the *ACE_TAO_* .tar.xz file.
5. run ``tar xvfJ`` from inside the cloned OpenDDS, targeting the *build_* .tar.xz file.
6. Adjust the setenv.sh located inside OpenDDS to match the new locations for your ACE_TAO,
   and OpenDDS. The word "runner" should not appear within the setenv.sh once you are finished.
```

##############################
GitHub Actions Summary and FAQ
##############################

********
Overview
********

GitHub Actions is the continuous integration solution currently being
used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It builds OpenDDS and runs the
test suite across a wide variety of operation systems and build configurations.

> *****************
> Table of Contents
> *****************
> 
> * [Legend for GitHub Actions Build Names]
>   * [Operating System]
>   * [Build Configuration]
>   * [Build Type]
>   * [Build Options]
>   * [Feature Mask]
> * [Introduction to GitHub Actions Workflows]
> * [Caching]
> * [Job Types]
> * [Test Results]
> * [Artifacts]
>   * [Using Artifacts to Replicate Builds]
>   * [Using Artifacts to View More Test Information]
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Sphinx generates a table of contents automatically.

*************************************
Legend for GitHub Actions Build Names
*************************************

Operating System
================

* u18/u20 - Ubuntu 18.04/Ubuntu 20.04
* w16/w19 - Windows 2016/Windows 2019
* m10 - MacOS 10.15

Build Configuration
===================

* x86 - Windows 32 bit. If not specified, x64 is implied.
* re - Release build.  If not specified, Debug is implied.
* clang5/clang10/gcc6/gcc8/gcc10 - compiler used to build
OpenDDS. If not specified, the default system compiler is used.

Build Type
==========

* stat - Static build
* bsafe/esafe - Base Safety/Extended Safety build
* sec - Security build
* asan - Address Sanitizer build

Build Options
=============

> * o1 - enables --optimize

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* o1 - enables ``--optimize``
```

Literal things like paths and command line options should be marked as monospace to distinguish them.

* d0 - enables --no-debug
* i0 - enables --no-inline
* p1 - enables ipv6x
* w1 - enables wide characters
* v1 - enables versioned namespace
* cpp03 - --std=c++03
* j/j8/j12 - Default System Java/Java8/Java12
* ace7 - uses ace7tao3 rather than ace6tao2
* xer0 - disables xerces
* qt - enables --qt
* ws - enables --wireshark
* js0 - enables --no-rapidjson

Feature Mask
============

This is a mask in an attempt to keep names shorter.
* FM-08
  * --no-built-in-topics
  * --no-content-subscription
  * --no-ownership-profile
  * --no-object-model-profile
  * --no-persistence-profile
* FM-1f
  * --no-built-in-topics
* FM-2c
  * --no-content-subscription
  * --no-object-model-profile
  * --no-persistence-profile
* FM-2f
  * --no-content-subscription
* FM-37
  * --no-content-filtered-topics

***************************
build_and_test.yml Workflow
***************************

Our main workflow which dictates our GitHub Actions run is

> `.github/workflows/build_and_test.yml`. It defines jobs, which are the tasks that

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``.github/workflows/build_and_test.yml``. It defines jobs, which are the tasks that
```

are run by the CI.

Triggering the Build And Test Workflow
======================================

> There are a couple ways in which a run of build and test workflow can be `started <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/events-that-trigger-workflows>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are a couple ways in which a run of build and test workflow can be `started <https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/events-that-trigger-workflows>`_.
```

Any pull request targeting master will automatically run the
OpenDDS workflows. This form of workflow run with simulate a merge
between the branch and master.

> Push events on branches prefixed "gh_wf_" will trigger workflow runs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Push events on branches prefixed ``gh_wf_`` will trigger workflow runs
```

A trailing underscore is used for some kinds of links. So it has to be formatted or escaped.

To make CI runs quicker, a seperate build is made for ACE_TAO, rather
than building it at the same time as OpenDDS. This allows us to cache
ACE_TAO relatively often due to the stability of the ace6tao2 branch.

Job Types
=========

There are a number of job types that are contained in the file build_and_test.yml.
Where possible, a configuration will contain 3 jobs. The first job that
is run is the *ACE_TAO_*. This will create an artifact which is used later
by the OpenDDS build. The second job is *build_*, which uses the previous
*ACE_TAO_* job to configure and build OpenDDS. This job will then export
an artifact to be used in the third step. The third step is the *test_*
job, which runs the appropriate tests for the associated OpenDDS
configuration.

Certain builds do not follow this 3 step model. Safety Profile builds are done
in one step due to the cross-compile nature causing problems. Static and Release
builds have a large footprint and therefore cannot fit the entire test suite onto
a Github Actions runner.  As a result, they only build and run a subset of the tests
in their final jobs, but then have multiple final jobs to increase test coverage. These

> jobs are prefixed by: *compiler_* which runs the tests/DCPS/Compiler tests, *unit_*
> which runs the unit tests located in tests/DCPS/UnitTest and tests/unit-tests, and
> *messenger_* which runs the tests in tests/DCPS/Messenger and tests/DCPS/C++11/Messenger.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
jobs are prefixed by: *compiler_* which runs the ``tests/DCPS/Compiler tests``, *unit_*
which runs the unit tests located in ``tests/DCPS/UnitTest`` and ``tests/unit-tests``, and
*messenger_* which runs the tests in ``tests/DCPS/Messenger`` and ``tests/DCPS/C++11/Messenger``.
```

In addition to these builds, there are some builds which will not run the test suite in
an effort to shorten the runtime of the continuous integration.  An exception to this is
that all builds which are not safety, and have ownership profile enabled, will run the
tests/cmake tests. Test runs which only contain CMake tests are prefixed by *cmake_*.

Test Results
============

> The tests are run using `autobuild <https://github.com/DOCGroup/autobuild>` which creates a number of output files

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The tests are run using `autobuild <https://github.com/DOCGroup/autobuild>`_ which creates a number of output files
```

##############################
GitHub Actions Summary and FAQ
##############################

********
Overview
********

GitHub Actions is the continuous integration solution currently being
used to evaluate the readiness of pull requests. It builds OpenDDS and runs the
test suite across a wide variety of operation systems and build configurations.

*************************************
Legend for GitHub Actions Build Names
*************************************

> Operating System (see `GitHub Virtual Environments<https://github.com/actions/virtual-environments>`_)
> ==================================================

Reviewer 4: [Doesn't work](https://opendds--2750.org.readthedocs.build/en/2750/internal/github_actions.html#operating-system-see-github-virtual-environments-https-github-com-actions-virtual-environments)

```suggestion
Operating System 
================

See `GitHub Virtual Environments <https://github.com/actions/virtual-environments>`_.
```

``build_and_test.yml`` is ``tools/modeling/tests/modeling_tests.lst``, which is included by passing ``--modeling`` to
``auto_run_tests.pl``.

To disable a test in GitHub Actions, ``!GH_ACTIONS`` must be added next to the test in the .lst file. These tests will not run when
``-Config GH_ACTIONS`` is passed alongside the lst file. There are similar test blockers which only block for specific github actions
configurations: ``!GHA_NO_BUILT_IN_TOPICS`` blocks GitHub Actions builds without built-in-topics from running a test, and
``!GHA_OPENDDS_SAFETY_PROFILE`` blocks Safety Profile builds from running a test. These blocks are necessary because certain tests
cannot properly run on GitHub Actions due to how the runners are configured.

Test Results
============

The tests are run using `autobuild <https://github.com/DOCGroup/autobuild>`_ which creates a number of output files
that are turned into a GitHub artifact. This artifact is processed by the
"Check Test Results" workflow which modifies the files with detailed summaries of the test runs.
After all of the Check Test Results jobs are complete, the test results will be posted in either

> the build_and_test or lint workflows. It is 'random <https://github.com/dorny/test-reporter/issues/67>'_ which one of the workflows the results will appear
> in, so be sure to check both. This is due to a 'known problem <https://github.com/mikepenz/action-junit-report/issues/40>'_ with the GitHub API for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the build_and_test or lint workflows. It is `random <https://github.com/dorny/test-reporter/issues/67>`_ which one of the workflows the results will appear
in, so be sure to check both. This is due to a `known problem <https://github.com/mikepenz/action-junit-report/issues/40>`_ with the GitHub API for
```
